this Sunday coronavirus pandemic
I am officially declaring a national
emergency president Trump's announcement
coming as cases Seoul do we feel that we
could have up to a thousand people out
right now who are curing around the
corona virus is going to be everywhere
and experts warn we're not ready for the
millions who may become infected the
system is not really geared to what we
need right now it is a family let's
admit it the president testing negative
for the virus hopeful the crisis will
quickly pass some of the doctors say it
will wash through it will flow through
my guest this morning dr. Anthony pouch
he head of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Republican governor Mike DeWine of Ohio
and Democratic governor JB Pritzker of
Illinois plus how ready are we we're
heading there almost inevitably there's
some sort of significant surge in demand
on hospitals I'll talk to two experts
about how prepared our healthcare system
is for the coming spike in cases and
whether our hospitals could become
overrun with patients and the great
shutdown France and Spain joined Italy
was sweeping restrictions chaos at US
airports as travelers returned from
Europe schools closing sports leagues
canceled theme parks going dark still
are we doing enough to slow the disease
joining me for insight and analysis are
Peter Baker chief White House
correspondent for The New York Times
NBC News Capitol Hill correspondent KC
hunt David Brooks columnist for The New
York Times and you Michel sindelle White
House correspondent for PBS Newshour
welcome to Sunday and a special edition
of Meet the Press
from NBC News in Washington the
longest-running show in television
history this is a special edition of
Meet the Press with Chuck Todd
good Sunday morning America's
recognition of the coronavirus crisis we
now face seems to have grown at about at
the same pace the virus itself has
spread slowly at first then
exponentially as of this morning there
were roughly 3,000 confirmed cases of
the corona virus in the u.s. resulting
in 60 deaths but there has been very
limited testing so those numbers may be
way off gone is the nonsense that this
is a hoax gone mostly is the
disinformation that this is nothing
worse than the flu and gone to is the
myth that were in for mere
inconveniences we're facing one of the
most serious health crises in American
history president Trump's declaration of
a national emergency on Friday called
the financial markets but only after his
teleprompter speech on Wednesday
prompted Wall Street's worst day in more
than three decades and this morning's
special edition of Meet the Press I'll
talk to dr. Anthony Fauci to governor's
and to hospital executives at the front
line of this crisis and of course we
have our political panel so many
questions remain
why has the u.s. reacted more like
overwhelmed Italy and like South Korea
where there appears to have been some
containment why do health experts seem
so much more alarmed than the federal
government does when will we have enough
test kits to know how widespread the
virus is well the health care system be
able to handle the coming surge in cases
and ultimately are we doing enough right
now to stop the epidemic we do know this
life in America is changing at least for
the time being
and sadly things are likely to get worse
before they get better we're moving into
uncharted territory millions of students
will now have to stay home the financial
markets in freefall a nation on edge as
efforts to contain a global pandemic
grind public life to a halt nervous
scared confused not really sure what's
going on governors in nineteen states in
Washington DC of closed schools the
National Guard is now active in a
growing number of states businesses are
shuttering last night airports from
Chicago to Dallas to New York jammed
with Americans trying to come home I
have just enacted an executive order to
activate the National Guard a state
disaster for all counties in the state
of Texas we will close all k-12 schools
on
Friday the president declared a national
emergency a national emergency two very
big words the action I am taking will
open up access to up to fifty billion
dollars and the House passed an
emergency relief package the legislation
includes two weeks of paid sick leave
and up to three months of paid family
and medical leave for many Americans as
well as food aid enhanced unemployment
benefits and free testing regardless of
insurance coverage the three most
important parts of this bill are testing
testing testing still despite weeks of
promises on testing on the subject of
testing we've been making steady
progress the production and shipping of
tests that we've talked about all week
is completely on schedule the Atlantic's
kovat tracking project reports that
fewer than 25 thousand tests have been
conducted nationwide NBC has confirmed
about 3,000 reported cases but testing
data is very difficult to collect people
should not say if you wanted to go get
in touch right now we have a serious
deficiency and being prepared for
testing do you take responsibility for
that
yeah no I don't take responsibility at
all because of the limits on testing the
actual number of cases is likely much
higher even though we've only have five
confirmed cases we feel that we could
have up to a hundred thousand people in
Ohio right now who are carrying around
the corona virus and joining me now is a
very familiar face these days in this
crisis it's dr. Anthony Fauci the head
of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases dr. Foundry welcome
back to Meet the Press
good to be with you chuck uh let me
start with the testing issue and I
started with there because I feel as if
this is we're on repeat every week we're
told no we're ramping up and every week
we don't ramp up yeah that's that why
should we believe that this is the week
that this was going to work yeah Chuck I
think the reason is because we've really
made somewhat of a sea change here
before I mean obviously early on we
weren't in the situation where we could
actually get they test out on a broad
way and I mentioned on the show
last week that we need to get the
private sector involved and just a
couple of days ago we had the CEOs there
who are going to be now putting it on
full overdrive so I would expect that
very soon when I say soon I'm talking
about days two days to a week where you
gonna start to see it go up like this
not everybody tomorrow is gonna be able
to get a test but pretty soon you're
gonna see a major escalation of
capability and implementation I just
want to point out and this is just one
example Steve people's he's a reporter
for The Associated Press he shared his
experience I'm presenting mouths
symptoms headache mild fever mild cough
I want to get tested in North Jersey
primary care tells me go to er er tells
me to call City Health Department Health
Department tells me to go to Urgent Care
Urgent Care tells me to go to ER and
everybody says no tests yeah that's
right and you're gonna hear about that
even a little bit you're gonna hear
individual ones but as a group it's
gonna change truck it really is because
once you get the heavy hitters from
industry and private sector involved
they're gonna be able to make it go
what's realistic about the spread of
this virus right now and we've had you
know Governor Mike DeWine who's gonna be
on the show later he he goes well yes we
only have 26 confirmed cases but his
scientific advisors assume there's a
hundred there might be a hundred
thousand people with it you know hi oh
is that a fair estimate it is the nature
of outbreaks are that you percolate a
little bit along and then you reach what
we call an exponential fave if you look
at every curve chuck it does this and
then it goes way up what we and and and
Italy is an example of individual
country that did not implement them
massive type of containment and
mitigation and it went way up so they're
here now they're really struggling our
goal right now is that if you do nothing
it's gonna do this we're gonna get more
cases no matter what but we need to do
with containment and mitigation is to
blunt that curb because left to its own
devices it's gonna do this how do you
know when this curve is blunt and do you
have any evidence that we're blunting it
you know right now well I'm sure that we
are with what we're doing but the
numbers don't tell us that yet so what's
gonna happen is that if it goes like
this and continues and doesn't come down
if you have a mound you've done
something but you don't know about it
until after the fact on any given day
you can't say oh we've blunted the
numbers because the numbers are still
going up no matter what you do it's how
much up they go that is the issue I
guess the question is are we are we
taking these precautions that you and
others have said sir say I don't know if
you've seen overnight these pictures at
various airports as people scramble to
come back from Europe stuck I mean look
at these crowds and O'Haire you had
crowds in Dallas at Dulles and these are
people because of this worried they want
to get back into the country from Europe
and they're being jammed together the
this is the federal government you've
the governor of Illinois basically said
look we can't do anything about this
this is the federal government what went
wrong here no I don't think anything
went wrong I think it's just the nature
of the problem when you have a situation
where people are in different countries
that there are going to be restrictions
American citizens that family others
permanent residents can get back they
don't need to immediately get back
because they think they're gonna be left
out there but they came but that's what
they did that's what they did but
they're not they will be able to get
back when they do get back they're gonna
have some enhanced screening depending
on the country if you're in the European
group if you're now with the UK and
Ireland what you're gonna have is you're
gonna have two weeks of of self-imposed
isolation Italy you've brought up Italy
a few times I want to bring up a story
here in the Boston Globe where one
Italian journalist shared the following
remark and it just said many of us were
too selfish to follow suggestions to
change our behavior now we're in
lockdown
and people are needlessly dying this is
st. Patty's Day weekend there's been
plenty of bars and restaurants been
crowded is this a mistake a France and
France just shut it down yeah
Spain is shutting it down I think
Pennsylvania is thinking about doing
this should the country shut down bars
and restaurants well you know that's an
individual question what the country
should do is absolutely and more so
proportionately in those areas that have
communities spread but as a country what
areas don't have community spread well
you know I mean real obvious community
spread so the question is that you want
to
bring down and hunker down everywhere
even more so I'm not saying the rest of
the country is okay don't worry about it
everybody's got to get involved
indistinct themselves socially if you
are in an area with this clear community
spread you have to be much much more
intense about how you do that that's
where you get things like school
closings you don't want to school close
every school in the country but there
are areas why don't you and I ask this
because is it do you worry that if some
places do a lockdown but some don't I
take you know I think Indiana is one of
the every state that touches Indiana has
closed schools but Indiana hasn't for
instance so it is are you risking
something if not everybody is following
the same guidelines no Chuck you always
want to be ahead of the curve I mean the
golden rule that I say is that when you
think you're doing too much you're
probably doing enough or not enough okay
all right that's the thing you've got to
do you don't want to be complacent you
always want to be ahead of the curve but
it depends on how far ahead of the curve
you want to be don't even for a second
think that I'm saying we shouldn't I
like to be criticized when I say oh
you're being too over-reactive that's
good for me right let me ask it this way
we've got a healthcare officials say
this to us that if if we could guarantee
that people would get their sick leave
pay guarantee that we can basically do
what FEMA does in a natural disaster
give people cash for the basics for
groceries and would you prefer a 14-day
just sort of national shutdown to slow
this you know I would prefer as much as
we possibly could I think we should
really be overly aggressive and get
criticized for overreacting okay have
you made this have you made this point
of view known inside the administration
yes is it getting pushback or are they
also getting in fairness they listen and
they generally go with what we say so
are we should we expect more closures
should should more Americans be prepared
to be hunkering down at their house I
think Americans should be prepared that
they're gonna have to hunker down a
significantly more than we as a country
are doing that means no restaurants no
bars things like when you say no I hear
you say no you know unlike
I mean it much more so I mean obviously
you're gonna have people are gonna go to
restaurants anyway but for the most part
and particularly if I can say this this
is particularly appropriate and relevant
for people at the high risk the elderly
and those who have underlying conditions
right now and should really hunker down
the final thing I want to ask you about
is our Hospital preparedness the
ventilator situation in the respirator
situation both seem to be potentially
dire if this if we don't flatten the
curve how concerning well if you have a
really massive increase in cases there's
no country or anybody in the world
that's going to be perfectly prepared
but we have a stockpile and we will
hopefully be able to backfill and refill
that stockpile but I think people should
remember that's the reason why we want
to blunt that curve if you let the curve
get up there then the entire society is
gonna be here should all elective
surgery be postponed right now know for
the most part elective surgery keep
people out of the hospitals except those
who need to be in the hospitals and if
you think you have symptoms don't go to
a hospital correct don't contact a
physician contact a health care provider
and get some instructions about how you
can get tested but stay home all right
and final question is this I want to
show the picture of the briefing
yesterday are you guys practicing enough
social distancing I you know at the time
the president was being tested but I
mean you looked up here and a lot of us
were going wait a minute we've been told
not to be in a crowd that small right
you know a crowd that's small but
sometimes there's business that you need
to do but I'm working on a Chuck I'm
working on getting everybody to do this
elbows out talking about Chi I know
these have been some long nights some
long days thanks for coming on and
giving us more information always good
to be with you jack in our new NBC
news/wall Street Journal poll that is
out this morning we asked registered
voters how much confidence they have in
government leaders to handle the corona
virus outbreak seventy-five percent say
they have confidence in their state
government 72 percent said the same
about their local government 62 percent
said the same about the federal
government and just forty eight percent
said they have that kind of confidence
in president Trump individually
as the heads of state government topped
that list and we have two of them with
us this morning Republican governor Mike
DeWine of Ohio and Democratic governor
JB Pritzker of Illinois gentlemen
welcome to Meet the Press as you both I
think heard I referred to both of you
during that interview with with dr.
Falchi governor Pritzker let me start
with you with what happened overnight at
O'Hare and again you weren't the only
Airport but every major International
Airport seemed to have a similar
situation doctor foul she seemed to say
look that that is what's going to happen
when you come back into this country
what do you believe should have been
done that wasn't done well that's not
right I mean I have enormous respect for
doctor foul Qi but that's just incorrect
we knew when the president gave the
orders that European travel back to the
United States was going to be cut off
that there would be an influx of people
Americans and others that would come
before the final cutoff so what should
have happened they should have increased
the Customs and Border Patrol numbers
and they should have increased the
number of CDC personnel on the ground
doing those checks they did neither of
those so last night as people were
flooding into O'Hare Airport they were
stuck in a small area hundreds and
hundreds of people and that's exactly
what you don't want in this pandemic so
we had that problem and then today it's
going to be even worse there are a
larger number of flights with more
people coming and they seem completely
unprepared you have not gotten any
reassurance from from customs officials
that they are going to have more folks
on hand today well here's what I got I
got a call at about 11 o'clock last
night after that tweet from a White
House staffer who yelled at me about the
tweet that is what I got now we've been
talking to Customs and Border Patrol
officials directly on the ground at
O'Hare I've been working with the mayor
and our senators to make sure that we're
getting the federal government to pay
attention to this problem because we
can't have it happen all day today
governor DeWine you've been among the
more governors that have I think
following dr. fauci's advice and frankly
I think your own a health official who
said in pandemics if people think you're
overreacting at the
and then after it's over they think
you've under reacted based on what you
heard from dr. fauci are you gonna close
bars and restaurants in the state of
Ohio but we're certainly looking at that
you know we started off last week
closing the schools we reduced the
number of people gather together two to
two hundred
you know we've restricted access to our
nursing homes to our prisons so we're
taking tough steps and Chuck I think
it's very instructive I know people
talked about this before but I just
looked at a chart you look at the
pandemic of 1918 you compare the two
cities of st. Louis in Philadelphia yeah
and you saw saw Philadelphia didn't get
it but the thing that I noticed in the
chart is Philadelphia was only two weeks
behind st. Louis and so Philadelphia's
it went up straight like this st. Louis
is more like that and so what it tells
us is you know all the people I've been
consulting from dr. Amy Acton who's
doing a great job as my health director
but two national experts they say look
it every day counts so much and you just
you cannot wait you've got to move very
very quickly and look these are tough
decisions we're inconveniencing you
people it's making people's lives change
yeah but we've got to save life
everything we're doing is to save lives
you know it's it struck me governor that
on Wednesday I think you announced six
cases Thursday thirteen Friday 26 I we
can do basic math here double double
double it's what dr. pouchy said I'm
certainly I'm certain you're not excited
about your 2:00 p.m. briefing today that
you'll be doing do you have any
indication that anything is is bending
this curve down to that mound yet well I
don't think we can tell but you know as
the experts tell me we're always way way
behind in what we know our testing is
just now ramping up for example the
Cleveland Clinic University of
Cincinnati some other hospitals are just
now basically coming online in their
ability to test so we're going to see
the number of tests go up dramatically
but what I'm telling the people of Ohio
look none of this should be a surprise
we know there's a bunch of people out
there who are carrying this virus around
and that's part of the message
particularly to young people who may
you aren't so worried about the
20-somethings look you may not get
really really sick you may get lucky but
you may take that to your grandmother
who's 80 and we know people in their 80s
the mortality rates at least 15 to 20
percent so everybody's got to take care
of everybody else
governor Pritzker and I'm sure other
cities will be offended if I say this
Chicago does st. Patty's Day on a level
that many other cities do not I know
you've been concerned about the crowds
at bars and restaurants already over the
weekend are you thinking about shutting
down bars and restaurants particularly
after hearing what dr. Fauci said well
let me just compliment Governor DeWine
and the other governors who we're the
ones who've had to provide the
leadership because the federal
government just has fallen down on this
so they didn't advise us to shut down
major events sporting events parades we
made those decisions on our own there
they are not the ones that advised us to
close schools we made those decisions on
our own so we're on our own out here I
wish we had leadership from Washington
we're not getting it with regard to
Saint Patrick's Day we shut down the
parade we didn't color the river green
as we usually do and I have advised that
we need to keep our crowds smaller and
yesterday we saw that you know we put a
limit of 250 people and gatherings we
canceled all the gatherings larger than
that and then yesterday what we saw was
many young people who think they're
impervious to this right went out and
celebrated and I had my 2:30 briefing
yesterday called out the the problem of
people on the street and unfortunately
we haven't seen a lot of movement people
aren't understanding that even if you're
healthy even if you're young yeah that
you may be a carrier and you're gonna
hand it over to somebody else kovat 19
is spreading because even healthy people
can be walking around giving it to other
people so did you we need to go on
lockdown did you I was just gonna say it
sounds like then you so are you gonna
close bars and restaurants that is your
plan or we have you sort of contradicted
yourself there saying you were going too
small keep the size smaller but then
you're making the case to lockdown well
what I'm telling you is that we've been
on the trajectory now and planning for
each of these steps because it's not
easy you can imagine each one of the
decisions has consequences to them that
are not just about the pandemic they're
also about people's livelihoods so we're
actually looking hard at that
decision-making today we obviously saw
what happened in Europe right nowhere in
the United States really has there been
a lockdown on powers and restaurants but
it's something that we're seriously
looking at both of you have primaries on
Tuesday you have indicated a couple of
days ago you guys will go forward any
hesitancy governor DeWine you first
we're going to go ahead but we're
telling people to again to be careful
the good thing in Ohio is we have
basically four weeks of voting people
can vote today we're urging them to go
vote today if you vote Monday they've
got 13 hours on Tuesday so that's that
just naturally spreads spreads it out
we're asking them to be very very
careful governor governor pritzker any
second thoughts about the primary on
Tuesday we've done the same as Ohio we
have actually lengthened our hours of
early voting we have mail balloting
we've had record mail balloting this
year so we're gonna go ahead with it but
we've been extra careful at all of our
polling places everybody is practicing
good hygiene and we're making sure that
it's safe for people to come and vote
the schools are closed so many people
will be voting in schools yeah and there
won't be big crowds I have a feeling it
may be the last primaries we have for a
little while anyway governor's DeWine
and Pritzker thank you both for joining
us I know these are long days and nights
yeah thank you both for your service
thank you one of the great fears in this
crisis is that hospitals could become
overwhelmed by a tsunami of cases when
we come back I'll talk to two top
hospital executives on whether our
health care system and survive what's
coming their way
[Music]
welcome back of the thousands of
confirmed cases of Cova 19 turned into
millions how will our health care system
manage the steps were taking like social
distancing are all an effort to flatten
the pandemics curve so that hospitals
aren't overwhelmed that is why this
flattening of the curve is such a
priority joining me now are Johnny spies
Oh the president of UCLA health and dr.
Peter Slavin the president of
Massachusetts General Hospital welcome
to you both let me start with you dr.
Slavin about the things that Mass
General is doing Wendy when are you
preparing for what is going to be the
peak of this curve whether it's a mound
or a spike is it is this coming in days
weeks when do you expect it good morning
Chuck this is something that places like
Mass General and hospitals around the
country do on a daily basis on a small
scale we've been preparing for disasters
for over a hundred years and for this
particular one over the last two two
months we're taking a variety of steps
to get ready we like other parts of the
society or promoting social distancing
asking our staff who can stay at home to
stay at home canceling elective surgery
and trying to do as much outpatient care
through telemedicine particularly for
vulnerable populations and we're
training our staff and getting ready to
engage in in this difficult challenge
that lies ahead do you have a timeframe
that at all that your experts are
telling you based on what they think is
happening in New England
we think that the next week or two are
going to be critical we've begun to see
cases in this area but we expect them to
rise dramatically in the coming weeks
Johnny spezzo you've had the West Coast
has been dealing with this a little bit
longer than the East Coast what have you
learned over the last six weeks that
tells you what what what we should be
expecting over the next six weeks well
thank you for having me I want to first
start by saying this is definitely an
unprecedented time for health care
systems in our country but Chuck I want
your viewers to also know the remarkable
effort that our staff
making around the clock to really
prepare and implement our emergency
preparedness plan for the Cova 19
outbreak and all of this is really
consistent with our mission of an
academic health system to really treat
the most complex injury and illness that
we see with our team of experts to
really train that next generation of
healthcare professionals on how to face
these outbreaks and to conduct that
leading-edge research and discovery that
hopefully will lead to more cures so we
focused on in addition to all the things
that Peter mentioned our big focus has
been how do we establish surge capacity
recognizing that most of our hospitals
are full so our efforts have looked at
really how we can create additional
places to care for patients if you go
past our emergency department now you'll
see tents erected in the parking lot
that allow us to increase emergency
department capacity we're throughout our
180 clinics throughout Los Angeles in
Southern California we're encouraging
telemedicine visits so we can create
additional capacity there we set up a
satellite drive-through testing station
we were fortunate at UCLA health our
biology lab was one of the first to be
able to start testing and doing our own
tests that really save us time we're
hoping to continue to increase capacity
and having that drive-through area
allows us to really contain patients
from coming in to our main hospitals
where our most sick patients are dr.
Slavin it seems as if the thing we keep
hearing about respirators and
ventilators respirators in this case
meaning the the the the healthcare
equipment essentially that healthcare
workers need to treat folks and of
course ventilators because if it gets
really this is one of the the things
with with the breathing issues for those
that are elderly what are your concerns
as the federal government stepped up
enough on this front
well my concerns is I think we need to
think about this in almost a warlike
stance my concern is that we have
millions of healthcare workers around
this country who are prepared to do
battle against this virus but I'm
concerned that there are at least a
couple of areas of supplies that they
need in order to
fight that virus as effectively as
possible one is the testing that we need
and dr. Falchi commented on that and I
hope indeed that private labs are going
to ramp up testing we've started at Mass
General Brigham - to increase to do our
testing as if yesterday but we also Hank
I'm very worried about personal is it
yesterday why wasn't this six weeks ago
can you help explain to viewers Wyatt
why why your lab and I talked to
Johnny's about this earlier well I know
they got online last week - why did
these private facilities and university
facilities get takes so long to get
online well it was just a day before
yesterday that we got the regulatory
relief from the FDA so that we didn't
need to jump through all sorts of Hoops
and prove that our testing was as
accurate as possible certainly the
testing is accurate but the FDA relaxed
its regulation so that we could begin
testing immediately my other big concern
is personal protective equipment even
before the most significant battles lie
ahead our supplies are low I hear from
hospitals around our region and around
our country that their supplies are low
and we need the federal government to
engage in a Manhattan Project to get
industry to create surgical masks eye
protection devices gowns so that our
health care workers can can engage in
this battle we wouldn't want to send
soldiers into war without helmets and
armor we don't want to do the same with
our health care workers and Johnny's
fees Oh last question for you one thing
the federal government hasn't done yet
that you'd like to see him step up and
do well again I think I'd echo what
Peter is mentioned about supplies we
really have to make sure we have the
personal protective equipment to keep
our health care providers and our
patients and our families safe Johnny
spies au Pitre Slavin Nast general UCLA
both coasts good luck over the next
couple of weeks and perhaps a couple of
months I know we're all we're all hoping
you can handle this surge capacity thank
you much for the latest on the corona
virus follow the live blog on
nbcnews.com slash corona virus when we
come back President Trump says he's
doing a terrific job confronting the
crisis
Amazon's
[Music]
welcome back the panelists here David
Brooks columnist for The New York Times
you Michelle sindoor White House
correspondent for PBS Newshour KC hunt
NBC News Capitol Hill correspondent and
Peter Baker the chief White House
correspondent for the New York Times
I feel like this morning Peter
we heard a little bit if you read
between the lines of doctor foul Qi and
the governors of this of the federal
government is leaning in but perhaps not
as much as they would like to because on
one hand they're making the case that we
need it
we're not doing enough and on the other
hand they're not ready to call for more
action right it's stunning to hear mash
and he'll say they just got the FDA
approval yesterday we've been hearing
about that from administration if this
is Mass General one of the leading
hospitals in this country I thought was
interesting moments this week came when
doctor foul she was on the hill and he
was asked by Congress people you know is
gonna get worse his guess is gonna get
worse what about things like NBA games
he says yes things like NBA games should
be shut down boom within 24 hours all
sports shut down right they they are
craving for direction they were craving
for Washington to tell them what are we
supposed to do at this point and they're
not hearing from the president the
president is kind of a bystander as
school superintendents and sports
commissioners and governors and mayor's
around the country making these
individual decisions to shut down
American life and the president hasn't
given that kind of firm direction and
guidance they're looking for I'm curious
I know I think I hurt but Casey did you
hear dr. Fauci recommend closing down
bars and restaurants it seemed like he
wasn't willing to quite say that but he
kind of implied it if if it were me and
I owned a bar a restaurant and I
listened to that interview I think this
is probably the best idea this is
probably be the best plan and to pick up
on Peter's point I mean this is
something I think we are hearing from
the community I mean I am hearing it
from my friends you know who are looking
to us in the media for guidance about
what to do I mean the idea that
Americans feel like they know that this
is something that they need to be
worried about they need to be taking
action in their own lives even if they
feel concerned they have no idea what to
do the LAT the lack of clarity is a
serious problem
you know David Brooks I want to this was
after the Wednesday address noah rothman
and commentary wrote there's no excuse
for the kind of carelessness and a
prepared address to the nation must last
one given a mid emergency circumstance
is the cumulative effect of these errors
and compromise palliative measures was
to leave the nation less confident than
it was before Trump spoke the president
might have been better off keeping quiet
but the point is it does seem as if that
lack of confidence and you start to see
it it's spreading with with different
people on how to deal with this crisis
well we see it with every federal
official none of them can get out in
front of President Trump so they all
have to hang back
I had a friend somebody I care about
deeply called me last night saying he to
fear and I had no idea what to tell him
like take motrin go to Netflix it was it
was very unnerving and then your next
instinct is I'm gonna drive up and see
him but I can't do that either and so
this goes against human nature that we
can't really care about our loved ones
and I think it does flow from the top
and we we have a president who doesn't
feel the emotions of other people and
therefore he can't read the country six
months ago he can't say while people are
really hurting out there people are
afraid out there I've got to act I've
got to act he lacks that sense and so
he's not really seeing the country he's
reading what people think about him
which is all he sees and therefore all
his reactions are late and deadened you
made sure it's just a rundown the last
two weeks take a listen we're finding
very little problem very little problem
now you treat this like a flu it's going
to disappear one day it's like a miracle
it will disappear this is the new hoax
it will go away just stay calm some of
the doctors say it will wash through it
will flow through missing urgency
well the defining characteristic of the
Trump administration has been this real
challenge for truth this real challenge
of the facts alternative facts you've
had the president say all sorts of
misinformation intentionally or not
intentionally
you had the president's lawyer say truth
is in truth what you have here is a
president who as David said wants to
calm people because people are frankly
terrified they're scared people are
crying in their cars wondering if they
should be in big crowds and you have the
president really bungling easy things
like an oval office address that should
have been able to say here's what you
can do as an American here's what are
the things that you needed you instead
you had and say miss informations like
you know all we're not sure if all goods
are going to be banned from Europe we
don't know if the
insurance companies are going to cover
the treatments of coronavirus he
obviously had to clean all that stuff up
and what you have is a leadership vacuum
here that people are really worried
about well and we've seen the governor's
have filled the vacuum yes I'm curious
congressional Republicans
it seems to me off line they're very
concerned that they're basically they're
basically being judged through the prism
of how the president is responding
governor's get to separate themselves
this is a crisis on Capitol Hill and you
know we're gonna spend the coming week
waiting for the Senate to take action on
a compromise that came late into the
night on Friday between the White House
and and House Democrats and it's not
clear to me that there is a path forward
with Senate Republicans there's so much
internal squabbling there's other
priorities and issues that they're
trying to deal with nobody can give me a
timeline nobody can say oh yes we're all
gonna get on board I mean the Senate if
all 100 senators agree they can act like
that right it takes a minute or two if
they if they if they want to do it that
way they can and so far no indication
that they're going to that is just
surprising on Mitch McConnell's part
frankly because usually he is laser eyed
knowing I don't think this is a Mitch
McConnell problem
I think McConnell is is in that gets
that yeah but there are some other
Republicans in the conference there was
a statement from Ron Johnson complaining
about some of the contents of the bill
there are other issues at hand that some
senators Mike Lee is focused on the FISA
renewal right the eye is not on the ball
right now in the Senate how does the
president deal with that well he's he's
subcontracted it out to Steve minuchin
actually he has been a non-player it
comes when it comes to these
negotiations he said Steve you take care
of it
he hasn't even spoken with Nancy Pelosi
now in weeks the two of them obviously
are estranged because of impeachment
because of other issues he's basically
left it to his Treasury secretary and
you know that's a consequence of the
partisan wars we've had these last four
years when the the number one official
in the country and the number three
official in the country are not on
speaking terms that doesn't lend itself
to the kind of action Washington
normally David Brooks what would we say
about another country whose politics
were so dysfunctional that they're
number one and number three that their
heads of two different branches couldn't
speak to each other we would call that a
failed state
and so you know we're we've we've
weakened our institutions over decades
we've had candidates running against the
swamp
well the swap looks pretty valuable
right now you want an establishment can
do stuff what we're lacking right now is
a complete mobilization the federal
government should be sending $1,000
checks to everybody they really need to
be ready men should be out there now
that we end the hospital gowns we just
heard we need the ventilators to be
built it really should be a world war
two mentality but then it took a certain
sort of consciousness oh we have
institutions that actually work we've
weakened them especially over the last
three years yeah I don't get the sense
you it feels as if the administration
sees this as a political inconvenience
still not everybody in the
administration of the political folks in
the administration it's probably better
way to look at it well you have the
president who is looking at his own
political futures and saying well the
thing that I was going to run on apart
from maybe culture war it's what's going
to be the economy and this is the thing
that I'm most worried about that's why
you had those last minute negotiations
on Capitol Hill where the president was
really trying to see why can't I get my
payroll tax why can't I get the
industries that are gonna be hit that
might strain my ability to get reelected
why can't they get the help they need
well I think all of that's coming it's
sort of like it's sort of one step at a
time and the only way to fix it is to
make it less of a medical disaster it's
the only way through it nice when we
come back the other ways the coronavirus
may impact the way we live
[Music]
welcome back data download time we won't
know the full economic impact of the
corona virus for some time but by the
day we learn how much bigger it will be
it's much bigger than just the stock
market and the last week countless large
events have been cancelled in people's
travel plans suspended creating huge
costs for local economies and travel
industries the NCAA cancelled all of
March Madness that cost Cleveland eight
million dollars for the first and second
rounds of the tournament the
cancellation of the Frozen Four which is
college ice hockey's men's championship
that's costing the city of Detroit ten
million dollars Atlanta was preparing to
host the culmination of the men's a
March Madness tournament the Final Four
and now that city is losing more than a
hundred million dollars in South by
Southwest the music film and tech
conference in Austin Texas that
cancellation will cost that city three
hundred and fifty five million dollars
flight cancellations are creating a huge
economic crisis for the major airlines
and their workers in fact flight
schedules have already been slashed to
levels even lower than they were after
the September 11th terrorist attacks and
in an effort to fill any seats at all
ticket prices have fallen rapidly these
are next day round-trip tickets during
peak spring break time and the prices
are still falling
those same flights for May are now only
$97 round-trip and hotel cancellation
rates are spiking across the globe 40%
of North America just over 50% in Europe
and a whopping 90% rate in Asia the
point is the financial repercussions
globally will grow fast and hit hard
health and safety obviously comes first
but many will be feeling the economic
strain from this pandemic for a long
time not just weeks not just months but
maybe even here
when we come back how Democrats and
Republicans are seeing even this health
crisis largely through a red blue
political lens
welcome back we have some numbers from
our new NBC news/wall Street Journal
poll 45% of registered voters polled say
they approve of the way President Trump
is handling the coronavirus all 51
percent disapprove it's but familiar set
of numbers check out the partisan split
this also is somewhat familiar Democrats
disapprove the president's handling by
an enormous 84 13 margin and guess what
Republicans completely flip the script
and they approve at the president's
handling by that similar enormous margin
eighty-one 14 but the partisan split
goes well beyond that far more Democrats
and Republicans are concerned that a
family member will catch the virus look
at that difference Democrats say they
are far more likely to avoid large
gatherings and Republicans are they're
also much more likely to have changed
their travel plans and there are three
times more likely to avoid eating at
restaurants David Brooks this is the
unintended consequence that a lot of us
feared of this polarization of how
people get information that to me is
that this show that how two-thirds of
the country gets their information from
one from one set of people and one-third
of the country gets it somewhere else
and you see it there yeah it's crazy I
mean is cancer a partisan issue now I
mean the virus is now a partisan issue
you see all reality through a partisan
lens and that's just one of the devices
can open up I look back and read about
all the different pandemics over
centuries and you think people come
together in a crisis they do in some
kind of crisis but epidemic they fall
apart
they're reporting from every crisis for
the last thousand years of this sort is
that neighbors withdraw from neighbors
you get widened class divisions you get
it out of fear you get a spirit of
callousness
don't forget xenophobia years obeah and
so in 1918 we lost 675 thousand
Americans to the flu and nobody want to
talk about it afterwards and that's
because they were ashamed of how they've
behaved and so we need to take some
moral step to make herself decent
neighbors to each other as we go sort of
this thing like I think people should
get on next-door this sort of Facebook
for for neighbors so at least you know
what's going on right around you which
is super important and so this is going
to be not only a health crisis in a
financial crisis it's how we treat each
other is going to deteriorate and we're
not gonna like who we were about to
become ameesha Wow you paint an even
more bleak picture than I thought this I
mean this was a depressing finding
because this idea that
that that people judge their public
health warnings through the prism of the
of the party the person belongs to it's
pretty crazy and there's this idea that
of course the president has not helped
this situation by being talking about in
front of thousands of people calling at
least the reporting of this a hoax
making it seem as though people talking
about the virus being an issue was
really a personal attack on him because
he feels obviously so personally
aggrieved that this is happening but
what you see here is the fact that as
you said there's a poor polarized nation
people are getting information straight
at sometimes from President Trump's
Twitter account and he's been trying to
downplay this from the beginning and
including contradicting his own health
officials I also think a really
important part of this poll was on page
16 which was question 20 when they said
who do you feel very specifically who do
you feel is very confident who you feel
confident about how they're handling
this most people said some up to seventy
five percent said they were happy with
the way the states were handling it less
than 50 percent said that they were
confident in the way that the president
was handling that should make president
from very nervous KC hunt it's within
this backdrop and the reason I also
opened with the partisan splits here
Democrats are far more concerned about
this than Republicans right now
this is the backdrop for tonight Bernie
Sanders Joe Biden what may be the final
democratic primary debate we've got
States postponing primaries Georgia is
the latest to do it Louisiana did it
earlier we'll see what happens after
Tuesday how many more states joined how
does Bernie Sanders happen I go after
Joe Biden tonight on a topic that isn't
about coronavirus I'm not sure he does
yeah Chuck I mean you've seen Bernie
Sanders himself already sort of struggle
going after Joe Biden there's there's
been some great reporting a Trudy Kramer
kind of wrote about why that was because
he still has fond feelings because Joe
Biden treated him well before Bernie
Sanders you know was a thing yeah and
Bernie Sanders continues to appreciate
that you know I think we've seen health
care be the center of all of these
Democratic debates or most of them
anyway
I think you'll see some more of that
tonight most likely but I think that it
is a nearly impossible situation to have
to be seen having a political squabbling
match in light of what's going on
I'm not interested in in the NFL free
agency news that I'm reading about now
when they have nothing else to write
about and I get it like it feels like
we're all on I think this is this makes
Bernie Sanders job almost impossible
yeah he wanted clewd to have one last
you know ideological head-to-head
one-on-one kind of confrontation would
abide to talk about the direction of the
party before the what seems to be the
likelihood that he ends up ending a
campaign at some point right this this
next set of primaries on Tuesday did not
favor Bernie Sanders presumably but
Biden you know has a great deal of
momentum coming out it and Bernie
Sanders wanted have one last chance to
say this is what I think our party
should be about and it you're right it's
been completely taken over like
everything else in our life by this one
issue David I want to close with the
cultural changes that this is going to
inevitably make in America you you spend
so much time sort of chronicling the
good and bad of these societal changes
that have taken place over the last
generation in one fell swoop we may make
massive changes and and how we interact
with ourselves that will last a
generation yeah well I do you think
loneliness and isolation are the core
problems underlying a lot of our other
problems and now social distancing has
become a virtue and so that's gonna make
that problem with loneliness detachment
alienation even worse and so it's up to
us to somehow neighbor by neighbor we
can't go and knock on the doors of our
neighbors right now right and but
somehow we have to make it contact if we
all have the emails of our neighbors we
could at least have some sort of
communication people old people died
when they're not checked up on in the
crisis we've learned that Christ and
crisis after crisis so check up on the
old lady next to you yeah there has
don't physically go next door drop a
letter or something and it is time for
culture wars the president's call this a
foreign virus there are people who are
not wanting to go to Chinese restaurants
even though maybe we won't go to all
restaurants but this isn't the time to
say these are the people who gave it to
us which of course is what President
Trump was saying when he and his address
was blaming the EU for not closing their
borders quick enough it's just not the
earth you want to blame blame it okay we
all live on the same plane I mean the
one positive thing I will say is I think
I've heard from more old friends more in
the last week than I have in the
previous year or
and a half you know I do think that
there is an element of common humanity
that you know I hope is bringing people
together despite some examples of poor
actors yes piling Purell and other
things you don't have to check your
phone if there's not anything else going
on but one thing so maybe pick up the
phone talk to your friends that's all we
have for today thank you for watching
please take the advice avoid big groups
practice social distance and stay safe
stay healthy we're back next week
because of it's Sunday
you